# sby-a-research-study














Super Brain Yoga
~ A Research Study ~

By Dr. Ramesh, MDS

As Master Choa Kok Sui says,~the Body is a
living battery that requires constant
recharging. This is done through different
means, especially through the transference of
Life Energy. One of the simplified techniques
is MCKS Superbrain Yoga which energizes
and activates the Brain.  Superbrain Yoga
gradually awakens the latent powers within us
while involving internal alchemy.




## FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN


The Human Brain has the following parts. i, Cerebrum
ii, Cerebellum
iii. Brain Stem, consists of Pons, Medulla Oblongata

Each has its own functions.
The cerebrum, which does the functions like, thinking, learning,
creativity, five senses, memory, emotion, problem solving, and
decision making.
The cerebellum, receives messages from most of the muscles in
our body. Then it communicates with other parts of the brain and
then sends messages about movement and balance, back to our
body.

The brain stem, which regulates the heart rate, breathing,
swallowing, blinking, digesting and more, it controls the basic
functions of the brain.
The right and left hemispheres of the brain appear to produce
different brain functions.
The left hemisphere is active in linear, logical, practical, rational
and time oriented activities.
The right hemisphere seems to be much more spatial, creative,
analogical, holistic and non-logical
The brain, a masterpiece of God’s creation, has an inherent
electrical potential, which is generated within itself and distributed
throughout the Body


## METHODS OF STUDYING THE


## BRAIN FUNCTION

Activities of the brain can be studied through the use of

• X-Rays
• EEG (Electro-encephalogram)
• CT scans (Computerized Tomography)
• MM Scan (Magnetic Resonance Imaging)
• PET scans (Positron Emission Tomography)









## BRAIN WAVES

The electrical potential generated by the brain is measured by
specialized equipment called “Electro-encephalograph”.
The EEG shows four types of patterns which are called the “Brain
Waves”
These waves are rhythmic in nature.
They occur independently on each side of the brain.
In certain instances, both sides of the brain waves are in
synchronization.


## SYNCHRONIZATION OF BRAIN WAVES

During meditation and deep relaxation, the left and right brain
wave patterns happen together. Scientists now believe that

## Synchronization makes:

• Much more brain power available
• Learning large amounts of information very quick
• High Creativity
• Self Control over all emotions


## THERE ARE FOUR TYPES OF BRAIN WAVES:

i. Beta Waves
ii. Alpha Waves
iii, Theta Waves
iv, Delta Waves

Beta Waves, which occurs at a frequency of 13 to 25 cycles per
second, It is mainly seen in intense
mental activity like, talking. speaking,
doing work, solving problems, etc.
It is also seen during tension.

Alpha Waves, which occurs at a
frequency of 8 to 12 cycles per second, It
is a state of quiet and resting alertness, It
also indicates relaxation, These waves
forms at the diffuse Thalamo-cortical
System in the Mid-Brain, Mostly these
areas have the functions of learning, memory, consciousness and
abstract thinking, etc, Most intensely recorded in the occipital
region of the brain.

Theta Waves, which occurs at a frequency of 4 to 8 cycles per
second. It is commonly seen in young
children During emotional stress in
adults, particularly during
disappointment and frustration, It occurs
in many brain disorders, Most frequently
recorded over the parietal & temporal
regions of the brain,

Delta Waves, which occurs at the
frequency of 0.5 to 4 cycles per second,
It is a state of deep sleep. It is also seen
in very serious organic brain diseases. It
strictly occurs in the cortex region of the
brain.








## BRAIN MAPPINGS

Using EEG Machine Kit (a Brain-view Plus Windows based
Digital Electro~encephalograph)* and its associated software
program, the Brain waves can be assessed in eight different ways,
depending on the parameters that need to be studied or analyzed.

• Brain Waves
• Single Amplitude Map
• Tn Map
• Frequency Map
• Frequency Spectrum
• Progressive Amplitude Map
• Progressive Frequency Map
• Frequency Tabular Analysis


## EEG

The procedure of recording Brain Waves is done by attaching
about 20 electrodes to the scalp of the patient. Microvolt level
EEG signals are amplified with an analogue amplification
device to volt level. It is collected by the computer. The
recorded signals may be displayed on the screen, It can be
printed on paper or stored on the computer and used for archival
purposes later.
The resulting traces are known as “Electro-encephalogram” or
Brain Waves

CLINICAL TRIALS, Pilot Studies

Study 1 tells about the comparative age-wise brain activity in
normal subjects
In this study we have compared the age-wise Brain activity of the
young age, middle age and old age of normal individuals,
As you see in this histogram, as age advances there is a marked
reduction in the Alpha waves. This is a normal phenomenon.
We also observe that Beta Waves become less active as age
advances, This may be due to less intellectual activity and
alertness,
There is a generalized, diffuse slowing down of wave pattern at
the older age. This slowing of waves occurs due to brain
shrinkage, neuronal loss and nerve degeneration, etc.

Study 2 tells about the comparative effect of Superbrain Yoga in a
Control subject (a person who is totally not aware of the Superbrain
Yoga Exercise) and a regular practitioner, who practices the
Superbrain Yoga regularly for about one year without fail. This is a
comparative study of Alpha wave activity through.
.

## BENEFITS OF ALPHA WAVES


§ Benefits are more, if more Alpha waves are generated.
§ There is a relaxed concentrated state of mind which makes
a person ore alert.
§ There is a synchronization of the right & Left sides of the
brain.
§ An increase in Alpha waves helps relieve anxiety and
reduces stress related disorders.
§ It strengthens the immune System, thereby improves the
ability of the body to heal faster.
§ This is effective for reprogramming our inner conscious
levels.
§ It is a state of high Creativity, which leads to peak
performance.



Superbrain Yoga, between a regular practitioner and a non-
-
practitioner (control subject).
Observe there is a uniform increase in Alpha wave activity
throughout the Brain in this Frequency map program
Alpha wave activity especially in the Frontal & Occipito -
parietal regions is high, well appreciated in the Single
Amplitude Map program
The Tri Maps illustrate that in the control subjcct, the Brain
wave activity is un-coordinated and random in nature
Whereas there is a regular, coordinated activity of the Left &
Right sides of the Brain in a regular practitioner of Superbrain
Yoga, indicating Balance & Synchronization of Brain waves,

Study 3 tells about the immediate effect of doing Superbrain
Yoga
in a subject who is performing this exercise for the first time
ever.
For this study we choose a subject who was unaware about
Superbrain Yoga.


The subject was appraised about the technique in detail and
then asked to perform the same.
After an interval of 15 minutes we recorded the brain waves
again & found significant increase in brain wave activity,
especially Alpha Wave activity.
We also observe that, by doing this exercise Brain waves have
improved their coordination and balance between the right and
left sides.



OBSERVATIONS (pictured above)
Observe, the generalized increase in overall brain activity,
especially seen in this Frequency map & Tri Map.
Observe, there is a generalized overall increase in the Alpha
Wave activity (green peak waves) as seen in the Frequency
Histogram.
Increase in Alpha wave activity is best appreciated over Frontal,
Parietal & Occipital regions of the brain as seen in these Tri
Maps.
This exercise also Balances the Right & Left Sides of the Brain,
as see in these Tri Maps where there is a ‘Mirror Image’ life
effect produced, achieved due to Synchronization of Brain
Waves.








## BENEFITS OF SUPERBRAIN YOGA

According to our Master Choa Kok Sui
• It energizes and activates the Brain
• It increases the inner peace
• Reduces psychological stress and gives greater
psychological
stability
• Greater intelligence and creativity
• Regulates the sex drive
• Partial cleansing and energizing effect on chakras and auras
• Transformation of the lower energies into higher energies
• Proper functioning of the brain
• It increases the flow of pranic energies within the body
• Prolonged practice makes the practitioner in general,
smarter
and psychologically balanced
• Spiritual growth


## CONCLUSION

All these benefits are temporary in nature, if this exercise is not
practiced regularly. The Superbrain Yoga must be done almost
everyday to energize and activate the brain cells, To maximize
these benefits, please follow simple instructions of Master Choa
Kok Sui..

For further information please visit superbrainvoga.com




## RESEARCH ON ALPHA WAVES


## 1. 1978: Hardt JV and Kamiya J

ascertained that an increase in
percentage of the Alpha waves was
accompanied with an increase
in creativity and psychological
efficiency, particularly in competitive
situations. “Anxiety change through
electroencephalographic alpha
feedback seen only in high anxiety
subjects.” Science.
1978 Jul 7;201(4350):79-81.


## 2. Watson in 1978, observed

increase in Alpha waves had a long-
term
improvement of memory functioning,
speed of information, processing,
perceptiveness and decision-making
ability. Conceptmaking or problem-
solving..
Aust Fam Physician. 1978 Oct;7(1
0):suppl

## 2-3.



## 3. 1993: Hardt and Gale found out

that an increase in the percentage of
Alpha waves causes a significant
increase of flexibility in creating
ideas and images, which constitute
the basis of problem solving.
Assessment of frontal lobe
functioning in schizophrenia and
unipolar major depression
Psychopathology.
1 993;26(2):76-84.


## 4. 1994: Crawford et al. ascertained

that in persons characterized by
better durable attention, fewer errors
and more
efficient decision making, greater
than standard increase in high
frequency Alpha waves in the left
brain hemisphere occurs during
concentration. The oculomotor
neural integrator uses a behavior-
related coordinate system.
J Neurosci. 1994 Nov;14(11 Pt
2):6911-

## 23.



## 5. Klimesch W.: Good performance

is related to
increase in alpha power. EEG alpha
and theta oscillations reflect

## cognitive and memory performance:

a review and analysis. Department
of Physiological Psychology,
Institute of Psychology, University of
Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstr. 34, A-
5020, Salzburg, Austria.


## 6. M. Doppelmayr, , W. Klimesch,

et.al.; Alpha power is selectively
related to intelligence. Alpha wave
power is related to the ability to
process semantic information. EEG
alpha power and intelligence
Department of Physiological
Psychology, Institute of Psychology,
University of Salzburg,
Hellbrunnerstr. 34, A-5020 Salzburg,
Austria


## 7. Eugenia Chan: The use of

complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM) in pediatrics has
become widespread. Parents of
young children with developmental
and behavioral problemssuch as
attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
are particularly drawn to CAM
interventions to avoid or decrease
use of psychotropic medications.
The role of complementary and
alternative medicine in attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal
of Developmental & Behavioral
Pediatrics, Feb, 2002


## RESEARCH ON SYNCHRONIZATION


## OF BRAIN WAVES



## 1. 1958: Garroute and Aird found

that in
75% of the symmetrical EEG
locations for both brain
hemispheres, Alpha waves were
characterized by high levels of
synchronization.

## Studies on the cortical pacemaker:

synchrony and asynchrony of
bilaterally recorded alpha and beta
activity. Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol Suppl. 1958
May;10(2):25g-68.


## 2. 1973: Banquest (later Levine at

al. too) uncovered significantly
higher synchronization of Alpha
waves in both hemispheres of
people immersed deeply in
meditation.
A study of retention of knowledge of
neurosciences information.
J Med Educ. 1973 Sep;48(9):867-9.


## 3. 1974: Fehmi determined that

increasing the synchronicity of Alpha
waves between
many points of the cortex was
effective for significant improvement

## in many psychological functions:

concentration, perceptiveness, self-
awareness, intuition, calm and
overall life satisfacfion.The effects of
electrode placement upon EEG

## biofeedback training:

the monopoler-bipolar controversy.
nt J Psychosom. 1 989;36(1 -4):23-

## 33.



## 4. Klimesch W.: During mental

activity, when different neuronal
networks may start to oscillate with
different frequencies, each network
may still oscillate synchronously
Memory processes, brain
oscillations and EEG
synchronization. University of
Salzburg, Department of
Physiological Psychology, Austria.


## 5. 1999: Research of Neubauer et

al. suggests that, for more intelligent
people, synchronization occurs in
the high frequency Alpha waves
under the influence of stimuli Sleep
problems in the elderly. Am Fam
Physician. 1999 May 1;59(9):2551-
8, 2559-60. Review

Research on Alpha Wave activity in
Eminent Personalities
It is noted in the history books that,
when Alpha Wave power increases,
many scientists and other great
thinkers have had their flashes of
insight.
