# 10. Ayurvedas Perspective on Healing Mental Illness Author AdPurkh Kaur Khalsa, Emily K Smith

**Document ID:** DOC-B862C624D28C
**Language:** english (latin)
**Pages:** 12
**Class:** native_text
**SHA256:** `b862c624d28c2484289dee78bd61d3c272f012c6f2cb1c6c0baf5a30f5ed076e`
**Pipeline:** Document Intelligence v1.0

---

## Page 1

1
Ayurveda’s Perspective on Healing Mental Illness 
By AdPurkh Kaur Khalsa (Emily K Smith) 
 
The United States is within the midst of a mental health crisis.  A report conducted 
by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), a division of 
the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HSS), found that 18.1% or 1 
out of 5 adults in the United States was affected by any mental illness (AMI) with the last 
year.1   Approximately 1 in 25, or 4.3%, of adults in the U.S. experienced severe mental 
illness, defined by the report as “any mental, behavioral, or emotional disorder that 
substantially interfered with or limited one or more major life activities.”2  Additionally, the 
survey found 11.4% of adolescents aged 12 - 17 had experienced a major depressive 
episode (MDE) within the last year.3  
The Mayo Clinic describes mental illness as, “A wide range of mental health 
conditions that affect your mood, thinking, and behavior.”4   It also provides an overview of 
common treatment protocols for mental illness that may include any or all of the following:  
medications, such as antidepressants, anti-anxiety, mood-stabilizing and anti-psychotics, 
designed to manage chemical imbalances within the brain; psychotherapy, or talk therapy 
intended to increase coping and stress management skills; brain-stimulation treatments, 
such as electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), used in extreme cases where medication and 
psychotherapy have failed to yield results; hospital and residential treatment programs, for 
those patients requiring 24-hour care, who cannot properly care for themselves or are in 
danger of harming themselves or others; substance abuse treatment, to treat substance 
abuse issues which may co-exist with mental illness.  Lastly, the Clinic recommends patients 
participate in their own care by working together with the health care provider to decide 
which of the above-mentioned treatments are preferred.5  
For more than 50 years, the treatment of mental illness has been focused on the use 
of pharmaceutical drugs such as Thorazine, Prozac, and Valium, or psychopharmacology.6  
These medications are designed to correct imbalances in the neurotransmitters within the 
brain and alleviate the life-altering symptoms thought to be caused by these imbalances.  
With these new miracle cures one might expect to see fewer and fewer patients needing 
these treatments, but just the opposite is true.  The use of antidepressant medications alone 
has increased more than 400% since 1990.7  In his book, Anatomy of an Epidemic, Robert 
Whitaker notes the ”astonishing increase in disability numbers [due to mental illness] in the

## Page 2

2
past 50 years,” and explores the correlation between the increase in the use of psychiatric 
drugs and increase in mental illness diagnosis.8  The definitive physiological cause of mental 
illness has yet to be uncovered, leaving many patients in a gray area wandering from drug 
to drug looking for the perfect cocktail to manage their symptoms.  While little focus is 
placed on how they might ever get off the drugs.  While this introduction of 
psychopharmacology has revolutionized the field of psychiatry, bringing it out of the 
medical dark ages, there is still a need for whole person care that offers a real shot at 
healing without permanent psychopharmacological intervention.  Immerging research is 
opening up the chemical imbalance paradigm of treatment.  Recent studies have linked 
depression to dysbiosis, or imbalanced gut microbiota9 and to generalized inflammation 
throughout the body10. New approaches to the treatment of mental illness are opening the 
doors to a more holistic way of healing the mind.  
Ayurveda, the ancient medical system from India, is one such holistic therapy 
offering an alternative approach to healing mental illness.  Ayurveda presents a 
multifaceted approach to achieving swasta, or perfect health.  First and foremost it regards 
each patient as having a unique constitution consisting of body, mind, and spirit.  In 
practice, there is no single prescription for a particular disorder.  Rather three things must 
be understood from the perspective of Ayurveda:  
 
The Nature of the Individual  
 
The Nature of the Disease  
 
The Nature of the Medicine 
Only when these three factors have been addressed is healing possible.  The Ayurvedic 
practitioner begins with the least invasive treatment, such a modifications to diet and 
lifestyle, and progresses to more invasive treatments such as strong herbs, body therapies, 
and surgeries as a condition requires.  Ayurveda’s treatments can be mild in nature, 
involving only changes in diet and lifestyle.  These therapies can easily integrate into 
western treatment plans to augment the healing effect.  
Ayurvedic treatment, or chikitsa, begins by identifying and removing the root cause 
of an illness.  The symptom is then treated with qualities that are antagonistic to the 
imbalance, thus provoking the mind-body and spirit to reestablish equilibrium.  A period of 
cleansing to remove accumulated toxins may be necessary, through shamana or shodana 
chikitsa.  Followed by a period of rejuvenation, or rasayana.  Once the physical origins, such

## Page 3

3
as improper diet and lifestyle, have been resolved treatment can begin to work on the 
subtler levels of the mind and finally the spirit.   
 
 
The Mind in Ayurveda  
The Ayurvedic model of the mind is derived from Sankhya philosophy, one of the six 
major philosophical traditions from ancient India, or shad dharshana. Dr. David Frawley 
describes the four layers of the mind according to Sankhya as: 
1. Chitta – Conditioned consciousness 
2. Buddhi –Intelligent judgment 
3. Manas –Mind, capacity for imagination 
4. Ahamkara –Ego11  
Ayurveda recognizes three physical humors, or doshas (vata, pitta and kapha) as well as 
three mental humors, or gunas (rajas, sattva and tamas).  The sage Charaka describes the 
gunas as,  
Tamas: inertia, dullness, darkness 
Rajas: momentum, desire, action 
Sattva: peace, clear, balanced, steady12 
The first two humors are considered by Charaka to be imbalances, while the later is the 
natural state of the undisturbed mind.  The mind is also considered to be a channel, or 
srotas, through which consciousness flows.  Its origin lies within the physical heart, flows 
throughout the entire body and ends at the five sense organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue and 
skin).13  Each person has a unique personality, or manasprakruti, that Ayurveda describes 
through the language of the five elements and the three gunas.14  Classically, mental 
imbalances, or manasvikruti, are caused by the three bodily humors, vata, pitta and kapha, 
and by the mental humors rajas or tamas.15 
 
The Origins of Mental Illness 
Dr. Marc Halpern describes the origination of all mental illness as a lack of clarity 
(sattva) within the mind.16  This reflects the primordial cause of disease within Ayurveda as 
a whole, that upon taking birth we forget our true nature as spirit.17  Classically, Ayurveda 
recognizes three causes of disease: 
1. Prajnaparadha – Intellectual crime  
2. Asatmendriyartha samyoga – Misuse of the senses

## Page 4

4
3. Parinama – Decay due to time and motion18 
These causes illustrate the intimate relationship between body, mind, and spirit in 
Ayurveda.  The first two causes are key to the origins of mental illness.  Intellectual crime is 
making unhealthy choices, such as staying up too late or eating unhealthy comfort foods.  In 
serious mental illness, harm against the self or others, such as cutting, anorexia nervosa or 
physical abuse would fall into this category.  The second cause, misuse of the senses, is 
described by Charaka to be, “of three categories, insufficient use, over-use and wrong use. 
This will vitiate the doshas.”19  The sense organs are intimately related to the mind.  One of 
the most important issues today is the growing exposure to media, and the increasing 
access and use of touchscreen devices.  At the very least these devices distract us from the 
natural environment; at worst excessive use of smartphones is associated with sleep 
disturbances, increased stress, and symptoms of depression.20  The yogic practice of 
pratyahar, or the withdrawal of the sense inwards, is designed to correct imbalances of this 
nature.  
Mental imbalances also may be caused by physical imbalances stemming from the 
three pillars of health.  Ayurveda recognizes the primary importance of diet, sleep, and 
management of sexual energy, or brahamacharya.21  When the physical humors, or doshas, 
go out of balance they can throw the mind out of balance.  Vata mental imbalances will 
exhibit more fear, worry, and anxiety.  Pitta out of balance will exhibit anger, rage, and 
violence.  Kapha mental imbalances will manifest as lethargy and apathy.  Below is a chart of 
adjectives taken from Halpern’s, Principles of Ayurvedic Medicine, describing the balanced 
and imbalanced states of the doshas and gunas:22 
Table 52 
Vata 
Pitta 
Kapha 
Sattva (in 
balance) 
Enthusiastic, inspired, 
artistic, healer 
Clear perception, 
spiritual teacher 
Unconditional love, 
faithful, nurturing, 
compassionate, 
patient 
Rajas (hyper 
active) 
Fear, worry, 
nervousness, anxiety, 
insecurity, ungrounded, 
indecisive, hyperactive 
Anger, resentment, 
jealousy, envy, 
judgment, critical, 
aggressive, dominating 
Desirous, 
materialistic, 
attached, controlling, 
sentimental, stubborn, 
conditionally loving 
Tamas (hypo 
active) 
Self – destructive, 
addictive, secretive, 
paranoid, mentally 
disturbed 
Violent, vindictive, 
hateful 
Lethargic, apathetic, 
dull, depressed, 
manipulative, thievish

## Page 5

5
Classical Classification of Mental Illness 
Unlike the modern Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, that 
recognizes hundreds of diagnosable psychological disorders, the Charaka Samhita 
recognizes one category of mental illness, insanity or Unmada.  According to the classical 
text unmada is the, “Excessive wondering of the intellect, mind and memory “23 that is 
brought on by the consumption of impure food, blasphemy and mental shock.24  The root of 
unmada begins in the hrdaya, the emotional heart and seat of the intellect, where the 
aggravated doshas travel into the mental channels, subsequently causing an imbalance 
within the mind.25  Classically, there are five sub-divisions of Unmada: Vataja – due to 
vitiation by vata dosha, Pittaja – vitiated by pitta dosha, Kaphaja – vitiated by kapha dosha, 
sannipatiaka – vitiated by all three doshas, and one due to exogenous causes such as 
poisoning or possession by a demon.26 
The classical treatment for unmada is pancha karma.27 Pancha karma is Ayurveda’s 
go to treatment for clearing excess dosha and ama (toxins) from the body and mind.  The 
process takes place in three phases.  The first is a period of preparation or purvakarma, 
where through a process of internal and external oleation the excess dosha and ama are 
liquefied and returned to the digestive system.  The next phase consists of five actions to 
expel the accumulated toxins from the body; oil and herbal enemas which reduce vata 
dosha alleviating fear, anxiety, worry and insomnia; purgation which expels pitta dosha 
alleviating anger, resentment and irritability; and emesis which clears excess kapha 
alleviating depression, grief and attachment.28  The final phase or praschat karma is a 
period of recovery where the digestive fire, agni, is closely monitored and kept strong.  This 
is followed by a period of rejuvenation, or rasayana, where the fluid tissues of the body are 
rebuilt.  Charaka describes the effect of pancha karma treatment as, “When the heart, 
senses, head and bowels are evacuated with the cleansing therapies, the patient attains 
mental peace, memory and consciousness.”29  Additionally, a form of shock therapy, akin to 
modern day aversion therapy, may pacify the deranged mind.30  
 
Cultivating Sattva: Sattavajaya  
Ayurveda Psychology endeavors to change the energetics of the mind.31 To make the 
dull mind (tamas) sharp (rajas) and the sharp mind peaceful (sattva).  The Charaka Samhita 
states that the mind should be treated, “With knowledge, specific knowledge, restraint, 
memory and concentration,”32 and, “The person of a strong mind who does not indulge in

## Page 6

6
meat or wine; who eats only healthy food, remains clean both physically and mentally, does 
not become affected by unmada.”33  The process of restoring the health of the mind is to 
cultivate that quality of clarity in the mind, that Ayurveda calls Sattva.  Classically this form 
of therapy is one of the three main modalities of treatment34 and is the primary method for 
treating mental illness.35  In his book, Ayurveda and the Mind, Frawley describes the three 
stages of mental healing as follows: 
1. Breaking up Tamas/Developing Rajas – Moving from mental inertia to self-
motivated action. 
2. Calming Rajas/Developing Sattva – Moving from self-motivated action to selfless 
service.  
3. Perfecting Sattva – moving from selfless service to meditation. 36 
It is necessary to determine the starting by identifying which guna is dominant within the 
mind.  If the mind is tamasic, then rajasic, or active, therapies are necessary to break up the 
stagnation before moving into sattvic, or calming, therapies.  In Principles of Ayurvedic 
Medicine, Halpern details the steps to cultivate sattva:37 
1. Spend more time in nature – In order to allow the peaceful and harmonious 
impressions to flow into conscious through all five senses. 
2. Meditation – To bring stillness to the mind, and deeper self-awareness. 
3. Yoga – all eight limbs of yoga cultivate sattva by outlining a code of internal and 
external conduct.  
4. Avoid the influence of the media – TV is rajasic and disturbs the mind. 
5. Eat a sattvic diet – Consisting of pure, organic, fresh vegetarian food. 
According to Dr. Marc Halpern, the most important factor in treating mental illness is the 
maintenance of regular daily routines or dinacharya.38  Creating healthy and regular 
routines helps to build resilience within mind, or ojas, and stabilizes the mobile effects of 
vata dosha within the mind.  A healthy lifestyle will go a long way towards cultivating a clear 
and peaceful mind.  The emerging field of circadian medicine studies how our bodies and 
minds revolve around a 24-hour cycle.  Studies have linked misaligned circadian rhythms 
with depression, bipolar, and schizophrenia.39  
 
Diet and Nutrition 
More than anything else we do, our diet has a primary effect on the body and mind.  
Food taken into the body will be broken down into its basic nutrients (protein, fat, vitamins

## Page 7

7
and minerals) and subtle qualities (rajas, tamas and sattva).  Through the process of 
digestion, absorption and cellular metabolism we will literally become what we eat.  
Understandably, Ayurvedic treatment of mental illness emphasizes the importance of eating 
not only a nutritionally healthy diet but also one that is appropriate for the constitution of 
the individual. According to Dr. Frawley, rajasic and tamasic foods disturb or dull the mind 
and produce and unrest and disease.40  While a sattvic diet “aids in the treatment of mental 
disorders because it helps restore harmony and balance to the mind.”41  The sattvic diet is a 
plant based whole food vegetarian diet.  Sattvic food is fresh, high quality, nourishing, and 
organic such as whole grains and vegetables.  Canned, bagged, boxed, and processed foods 
lack life-force energy (prana) and are therefore tamasic.  Meat, fish and any foods that may 
be obtained by harming animals should also be avoided.42   
Even Western scientists are getting on board with the importance of nutrition in 
treating mental illness.  A 2014 review of the emerging field of nutritional psychiatry 
reported, “Research suggests that nutrition not only matters directly with regard to the 
conditions treated within various medical disciplines but also has the potential to influence 
mental outlook and mental disorders. … We cannot ignore this, particularly as it is 
becoming increasingly clear that diminished mental outlook and elevated perceptions of 
stress are drivers of unhealthy eating habits.”43  
 
Therapies for the Senses  
Just as food nourishes the body and mind, impressions taken in through the five 
senses also nourish the body and mind.  Ayurveda regards each sensory organ as an entire 
universe of perception.  Our modern world is lacking this reverent perception.  We are 
exposed to chemical scents, fluorescent lights, and constant background music.  Just as food 
must be digested before it can fuel the body, so too must sensory information be digested by 
the nervous system before it can be interpreted by the mind.  Therefore everything that is 
taken into the body should be nourishing in nature.  The senses can be used as a form of 
medicine when sensory impressions are consciously chosen or as poison when sensory 
impressions are driven by desires and addictions.  Below is a chart of specific dosha 
reducing impressions adapted from Frawley’s Ayurveda and the Mind:44

## Page 8

8
 
Vata 
Pitta 
Kapha 
Sound 
Calming music: 
classical, chanting or 
peaceful silence 
Cooling and soft 
music: Flute, Water 
sounds 
Stimulating music, 
strong energizing 
sounds 
Touch 
Gentle warming 
touch or massage 
using warm oils like 
sesame or almond 
Cooling, soft and 
moderate touch with 
cooling oils like 
coconut or 
sunflower 
Strong, deep body 
massage with dry 
powders and 
stimulating oils like 
mustard 
Sight 
Bright , calming 
colors like gold, 
orange, blue, green 
and white 
Cool colors like 
white, blue and 
green 
Bright, stimulating 
colors like yellow, 
orange, gold and red 
Taste 
Rich and nourishing 
food abounding in 
sweet, salty and sour 
tastes, with 
moderate use of 
spices 
Food that is neither 
too heavy nor too 
light, abounding in 
sweet, bitter and 
astringent tastes, 
with cooling spices 
like coriander, 
turmeric and fennel  
Light diet 
emphasizing 
pungent, bitter and 
astringent tastes 
with liberal use of 
spices, occasional 
fasting 
Smell 
Sweet, warm, 
calming and clearing 
fragrances like 
jasmine, rose, 
sandalwood, 
eucalyptus 
Cool and sweet 
fragrances like rose, 
sandalwood, 
vetivert, champak, 
gardenia and 
jasmine. 
Light, warm, 
stimulating and 
penetrating 
fragrances like musk, 
cedar, myrrh, 
camphor and 
eucalyptus 
 
 
Yoga 
According to Frawley, "Yoga is defined as calming the disturbances of the chitta, 
which are called chitta vritti, and in this regard, classical yoga is a psychology.  Defined as a 
means of alleviating, mental psychological and emotional suffering."45  Classical yoga, or 
ashtanga yoga, involves the practice of the eight limbs of yoga, described by Frawley as,  
1. Yama – Rules of Social Conduct 
2. Niyama – Rules of Person Behavior 
3. Asana – Physical Postures: Right Orientation of the Physical Body 
4. Pranayama – Breath Control: Right use of the Vital Force 
5. Pratyahara – Control of the Mind and Senses 
6. Dharana – Concentration: Control of Attention

## Page 9

9
7. Dhyana – Meditation: Right Reflection 
8. Samadhi – Absorption: Right Union46 
He continues to discuss the origins of mental illness and how the practice of ashtanga yoga 
can help: “All psychological problems arise ultimately from a misapplication of the energy of 
consciousness. … The practice of Yoga, or inner integration, reverses all psychological 
problems by merging the mind back into its immutable source of pure consciousness.”47  
Contemporary research into yoga as a therapy has primarily focused on asana, 
pranayama and dhyana.  The American Psychological Association reported, “There is a 
growing body of research documenting yoga’s psychological benefits.”48 According to Dr. Sat 
Bir Khalsa, neuroscientist, professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School at Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital in Boston, and a leading researcher in the field, “yoga targets unmanaged 
stress, a main component of chronic disorders such as anxiety, depression, obesity, diabetes 
and insomnia.  It does this by reducing the stress response, which includes the activity of 
the sympathetic nervous system and the levels of the stress hormone cortisol.  The practice 
enhances resilience and improves mind-body awareness, which can help people adjust their 
behaviors based on the feelings they're experiencing in their bodies.”  Additionally, a 
comprehensive Bibliometric Analysis of Published Research Studies on Yoga as a 
Therapeutic Intervention from 1967 to 2013 found, “A surge in publications on yoga to 
mitigate disease-related symptoms in clinical populations has occurred despite challenges 
facing the field of yoga research, which include standardization and limitations in funding, 
time, and resources.  The population at large has observed a parallel surge in the use 
of yoga outside of clinical practice.  The use of yoga as a complementary therapy in clinical 
practice may lead to health benefits beyond traditional treatment alone; however, to effect 
changes in health care policy, more high-quality, evidence-based research is needed.”49  
The use of mantra is another practice associated with yoga and meditation. 
According to Frawley, “Mantras are specially energized sounds or word… [and] is the main 
and most direct ayurvedic tool for healing the mind.”50   
 
Medhya Rasayana: Herbal Support 
Many plant medicines offer promising results for healing the mind.  Medhya 
Rasayana is the Ayurvedic category of herbs that have a specific action, or prabhava, on 
cognitive function, or nootropic action.51  Though no herbal remedy can substitute for the

## Page 10

10
benefits of a constitutionally appropriate diet and healthy lifestyle, additional support from 
these remedies may bolster efficacy of treatment.52  
One herb that stands out is the incredible adaptogen Ashwagandha, or withania 
somnifera.  A 2012 study showed that after 60 days of treatment with Ashwagandha adults 
with a history of chronic stress showed a significant reduction in stress and serum cortisol 
levels versus the placebo group.53  The Journal of Alternative and Complimentary Medicine 
conducted a systematic review of all research into the herb and of the five studies that met 
their criteria, all five found evidence that treatment with Ashwagandha resulted in 
improvements in anxiety and stress levels.54  Most recently the herb was used in a 
randomized double blind placebo controlled trial as an adjunct to the standard treatment 
for obsessive-compulsive disorder and was found to reduce the effects of the illness with no 
adverse reactions.55 
 
Conclusion 
 
Mental illness is a complex collection of disorders effecting millions of Americans 
and its prevalence may be reaching epidemic proportions if the numbers continue to grow.  
Traditional psychopharmacological therapies offer hope but with many side effects.  
Increasingly patients and doctors are looking for alternative modalities to broaden their 
approach to treatment.  Ayurveda, the classical medical system from India, which is over 
5000 years old, offers a full spectrum of alternative diagnostic models and therapies. 
Ayurveda’s approach to psychology treats each patient as a unique individual.  Practitioners 
build unique treatment plans for each patient incorporating the whole individual as body, 
mind and spirit.  More research into Ayurveda’s classical psychology is needed to illuminate 
the efficacy of its many therapies.

## Page 11

11
Endnotes 
                                                        
1 Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. (2015). Behavioral health trends in the United States: Results from the 2014 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. SMA 15-4927, NSDUH Series H-50). Retrieved 
from http://www.samhsa.gov/data/ 
2 Ibid 
3 Ibid 
4 Mayo Clinic Staff, “Diseases and Conditions: Mental Illness: Definition,” The Mayo Clinic, (Accessed September 14, 2016) 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/basics/definition/con-20033813 
5 Mayo Clinic Staff, “Diseases and Conditions: Mental Illness: Treatment” The Mayo Clinic, (Accessed September 14, 2016 ) 
Mayo Clinic Staff, Diseases and Conditions: . (Accessed September 14, 2016) http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/mental-illness/basics/treatment/con-20033813 
6 Martin, Emily and Lorna A. Rhodes. “Resources on the History of Psychiatry,” History of Medicine Division of the National 
Library of Medicine, August, 2004. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/hmd/pdf/historypsychiatry.pdf 
7 Pratt LA, Brody DJ, Gu Q. “Antidepressant use in persons aged 12 and over: United States, 2005–2008,” NCHS data brief, no 
76. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2011. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db76.htm 
8 Whitaker, Robert. Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in 
America, (New York: Broadway Books, 2010), p. 7  
9 Evrensel, Alper, and Mehmet Emin Ceylan. "The Gut-Brain Axis: The Missing Link in Depression." Clin Psychopharmacol 
Neurosci Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neuroscience 13, no. 3 (2015): 239-44. doi:10.9758/cpn.2015.13.3.239. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4662178/ 
10 Andrew H. Miller, Vladimir Maletic, and Charles L. Raison, "Inflammation and Its Discontents: The Role of Cytokines in the 
Pathophysiology of Major Depression," Biological Psychiatry 65, no. 9 (2009): , doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.11.029. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19150053 
11 David Frawley, “Ayurveda and the Mind: An Overview,” American Institute of Vedic Studies, June, 2012, 
https://vedanet.com/2012/06/13/ayurveda-and-the-mind-an-overview/ 
12 Charaka. Charaka Samhita Handbook on Ayurveda. Ed. Gabriel Van Loon. Vol. 1. (Chaukhambha Orientalia, 2002), P. 38  
13 Lad, Vasant, Textbook of Ayurveda: Fundamental Principles of Ayurveda: Volume One, (Albuquerque: The Ayurvedic Press, 
2002) p. 193 
14 Dr. Marc Halpern, Principles of Ayurvedic Medicine: Tenth Edition (September, 2010), p.190 
15 Ibid, p. 195 
16 Ibid, p. 247.   
17 Charaka, Volume 1, p. 38 
18 Halpern, p. 5-6 
19 Charaka, Volume 1, p. 83 
20 Thomée, Sara, Annika Härenstam, and Mats Hagberg. “Mobile Phone Use and Stress, Sleep Disturbances, and Symptoms of 
Depression among Young Adults - a Prospective Cohort Study.” BMC Public Health 11 (2011): 66. PMC.  
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3042390/ 
21 Charaka, Vol. 1, p. 216 
22 Halpern, Table 53, p. 198 
23 Charaka. Charaka Samhita Handbook on Ayurveda. Ed. Gabriel Van Loon. Vol. 2. (Chaukhambha Orientalia, 2002), p. 478 
24 Ibid 
25 Ibid 
26 Charaka, Vol 2, p.478 
27 Sarngadhara Samhita. Section 3. Chapter 1 & 3 
28 Charaka, Vol 2, p. 487 
29 Ibid 
30 Charaka, Vol 2 p. 493 
31 Frawley, David, and Marc Halpern. Ayurvedic Psychology: Anxiety and Depression. Rec. 18 Nov. 2006. California College of 
Ayurveda, 2006. CD. 
32 Charaka, Vol 1, p. 38  
33 Ashtanga Hrdayam, Vol 3 Chapter 5. Treatment of Insanity. V 59  
34 Behere, Prakash B. et al. “Ayurvedic Concepts Related to Psychotherapy.”Indian Journal of Psychiatry 55.Suppl 2 (2013): 
S310–S314. PMC. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3705701/ 
35 Frawley, David, and Marc Halpern. Ayurvedic Psychology: Anxiety and Depression. Rec. 18 Nov. 2006. California College of 
Ayurveda, 2006. CD. 
36 David Frawley, Ayurveda and the Mind: The Healing of Consciousness (Lotus Press, 1997), p. 39 
37 Halpern, p. 247-8 
38 Frawley, David, and Marc Halpern. Ayurvedic Psychology: Anxiety and Depression. Rec. 18 Nov. 2006. California College of 
Ayurveda, 2006. CD. 
39 Karatsoreos, Ilia N. “Links between Circadian Rhythms and Psychiatric Disease.” Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 8 
(2014): 162. PMC. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4018537/ 
40 David Frawley, Ayurveda and the Mind: The Healing of Consciousness (Lotus Press, 1997) p. 103 
41 Ibid 
42 Ibid, p. 191

## Page 12

12
                                                                                                                                                                     
43 Logan, Alan C, and Felice N Jacka. “Nutritional Psychiatry Research: An Emerging Discipline and Its Intersection with Global 
Urbanization, Environmental Challenges and the Evolutionary Mismatch.” Journal of Physiological Anthropology 33.1 (2014): 
22. PMC. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4131231/ 
44 David Frawley, Ayurveda and the Mind: The Healing of Consciousness (Lotus Press, 1997) p. 183-186 
45 Frawley, David, and Marc Halpern. Ayurvedic Psychology: Anxiety and Depression. Rec. 18 Nov. 2006. California College of 
Ayurveda, 2006. CD. 
46 Frawley, p.263 
47 Ibid, pg 259 
48Novotney, Amy. "Yoga as a Practice Tool." Monitor on Psychology 40, no. 10 (November 2009): 38. doi:10.1037/e598452009-
018. http://www.apa.org/monitor/2009/11/yoga.aspx  
49 Jeter Pamela E., Slutsky Jeremiah, Singh Nilkamal, and Khalsa Sat Bir S.. “Yoga as a Therapeutic Intervention: A Bibliometric 
Analysis of Research Studies from 1967 to 2013,” The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. October 2015, 
21(10): 586-592. doi:10.1089/acm.2015.0057.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26196166 
50 Frawley, p. 225 
51 Kulkarni, Reena, K. J. Girish, and Abhimanyu Kumar. “Nootropic Herbs (Medhya Rasayana) in Ayurveda: An 
Update.” Pharmacognosy Reviews 6.12 (2012): 147–153. PMC.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3459457/ 
52 Sarris, Jerome, David J Kavanagh and Gerard Byrne, “Adjuvant use of nutritional and herbal medicines with antidepressants, 
mood stabilizers and benzodiazepines” Journal of Psychiatric Research, Volume 44 , Issue 1 , 32 – 41. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.06.003. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19616220 
53 Chandrasekhar, K., Jyoti Kapoor, and Sridhar Anishetty. “A Prospective, Randomized Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study 
of Safety and Efficacy of a High-Concentration Full-Spectrum Extract of Ashwagandha Root in Reducing Stress and Anxiety in 
Adults.” Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine 34.3 (2012): 255–262. PMC. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23439798 
54 Pratte, Morgan A. et al. “An Alternative Treatment for Anxiety: A Systematic Review of Human Trial Results Reported for the 
Ayurvedic Herb Ashwagandha (Withania Somnifera).” Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine20.12 (2014): 901–
908. PMC. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4270108/ 
55 Jahanbakhsh, Seyedeh Pardis, Ali Akhondpour Manteghi, Seyed Ahmad Emami, Saman Mahyari, Beheshteh 
Gholampour, Amir Hooshang Mohammadpour, and Amirhossein Sahebkar “Evaluation of the efficacy of Withania 
somnifera (Ashwagandha) root extract in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A randomized double-blind placebo-
controlled trial” Complementary Therapies in Medicine, Volume 27, 25 – 29. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ctim.2016.03.018 
http://www.complementarytherapiesinmedicine.com/article/S0965-2299(16)30050-4/abstract
