# 1. Ancient Remedies for a Modern You An Introduction to Ayurveda Author Premal Patel


## ANCIENT REMEDIES FOR A MODERN YOU:


## AN INTRODUCTION TO AYURVEDA

by Premal Patel, MD



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

2
Chapter 1: What is Ayurveda?
Chapter 2: Prakriti—Your Constitution
Chapter 3: Vikiriti—Your Imbalances
Chapter 4: How Lifestyle Influences Dosha Balance
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—
Managing Doshas to Maintain Balance
Glossary
3
6
8
9
10
16
Table of Contents
Ancient yet timeless, Ayurveda gives us the means of
attaining and maintaining our own optimal health and
well-being. Its benefits have been proven over centuries
of use, and its methodologies are as applicable today in
the West as they were thousands of years ago in India.
Ayurveda recognizes that each person is unique and
offers a customized approach to wellness. This booklet
outlines the basics of Ayurveda, and explains how you
can begin to use this science of health for yourself.



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

3
Ayurveda is considered one of the world’s oldest healing
sciences, originating in India at least 5,000 years ago. Its
name is a Sanskrit word that literally translates as “the
wisdom of life” or “the knowledge of longevity” (it is a
compound of ãyus, meaning life or longevity, and veda,
meaning deep knowledge or wisdom). In accordance with
this definition, Ayurveda views health as much more than
the absence of disease.
Health, from an Ayurvedic perspective, is defined as a
gracious, tranquil, content, joyous, bright, and clear state of
the body, senses, mind, and spirit, including the balanced
state of one’s natural constitution, all bodily tissues, the
digestive capacities, and waste excretion. What a mouthful!
Simply put, health is achieved when you are aligned with
your own natural and unique state of balance.
How is Your Health Unique?
The key to Ayurvedic wellness and healing is the
knowledge that health is not a “one size fits all” proposition.
One must understand the unique nature of each person
and situation, taking into account the individual, the
season, the geography, and so on.
Each person has a constitution that is specific to him or her,
and movement away from that constitution creates health
imbalances; if such imbalances are not addressed, disease
may develop. So, the early signs of imbalance serve as a
wakeup call to make gentle and natural shifts in behavior to
return to balance—such as adjusting diet, modifying daily
activities, and taking herbal remedies for a time.
To understand how imbalances occur, and what to do about
them, we can look to the following fundamental concepts of
Ayurveda.
The Five Elements That Transform Our
Understanding of Health
Ayurveda arises from a tradition that describes the entire

## physical world—including man—in terms of five elements:

space, air, fire, water, and earth. These five elements can
most accurately be thought of as energetic patterns rather
than as purely physical substances, and each has particular
qualities. To help make sense of this, consider how these

## elements manifest in the natural world:

•	 Earth is cold, heavy, solid, stable, and dry.
This element is exemplified by dirt.
•	 Water is cold, mobile, heavy, soft, and
liquid. Think of the ocean.
•	 Fire is hot, subtle, mobile, dry, and sharp. Its
clearest manifestation in nature is the sun,
which provides warmth to the earth and sky.
•	 Space, as in the sky, is vast, cold, light,
and clear. It enables all other things to
have a place to take form and exist.
•	 Air is dry, cold, rough, and full of motion. To
understand these qualities, think of what it’s
like to be whipped by an aggressive wind.
These five elements clearly manifest individually in the
natural world. But even more profoundly, they all exist at all
times in all things—including in the body—and each has its
particular role to play.
Chapter 1: What is Ayurveda?



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

4

## For example, let’s look at the body’s digestive system:

•	 Earth rules the actual structure and
solidity of the digestive tract.
•	 Water rules the liquid, fluid quality of
the digestive juices and acids.
•	 Fire rules the heat and digestive enzymes
involved in the metabolic process.
•	 Space pervades the whole process,
including the space within each cell.
•	 Air rules the peristaltic movement of the
nutrients through the digestive tract.
In fact, each and every cell of the body is made up of all
five elements.
The Three Doshas That Will Change the Way You
See Yourself
The five elements combine in various ways to form three
constitutional principles, known in Ayurveda as doshas.

## These are:

•	 Vata, comprised of air and space.
•	 Pitta, comprised of fire and water.
•	 Kapha, comprised of earth and water.
To understand these principles at their core, it is useful
to think of the different qualities of the elements that
create them.
Vata
Composed of air and space, vata is dry, light,
cold, rough, subtle/pervasive, mobile, and clear. As such,
vata regulates the principle of movement. Any bodily
motion—chewing, swallowing, nerve impulses, breathing,
muscle movements, thinking, peristalsis, bowel movements,
urination, menstruation—requires balanced vata. When
vata is out of balance, any number of these movements may
be deleteriously affected.
Pitta
Pitta brings forth the qualities of fire and water.
It is sharp, penetrating, hot, light, liquid, mobile,
and oily. Pitta’s domain is the principal of transformation.
Just as fire transforms anything it touches, pitta is in
play any time the body converts or processes something.
So pitta oversees digestion, metabolism, temperature
maintenance, sensory perception, and comprehension.
Imbalanced pitta can lead to sharpness and inflammation
in these areas in particular.
Kapha
Kapha, composed of earth and water, is heavy,
cold, dull, oily, smooth, dense, soft, static, liquid, cloudy,
hard, and gross (in the sense of dense or thick). As kapha
governs stability and structure, it forms the substance of
the human body, from the skeleton to various organs to the
fatty molecules (lipids) that support the body. An excess of
kapha leads to an overabundance of density, heaviness, and
excess in the body.
Once you put on the lenses of Ayurveda and see things in
terms of vata, pitta, kapha, and combinations thereof, the
whole world comes alive in a new way. Look at the world
around you! The doshas take form in endlessly interesting
ways (see Table 1 for examples).
Chapter 1: What is Ayurveda? (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

5
Table 1
Examples of Vata, Pitta, and Kapha
•	 Vata: A tornado, a hummingbird, and wind energy
•	 Pitta: A volcanic eruption, a tiger, and solar power
•	 Kapha: An earthquake, an elephant, and geothermal power
Chapter 1: What is Ayurveda? (cont’d)

## VATA


## PITTA


## KAPHA




## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

6
The Big Question: What’s Your Dosha?
The three doshas, representing the five elements, are
present in everyone to some degree. They are all a
necessary and integral part of the body. But each of us is
born with our own unique dosha balance, known as our
prakriti. We are truly individuals—even twins are born
with differences.
Some people are dominant in one principle—either vata,
pitta, or kapha. While others have two doshas that come to
the fore, though one of the two is often primary (even more
present). Still others possess a fairly equal balance of each
vata, pitta, and kapha (this is called tri-doshic), though this
is rare.
So what’s your prakriti? Knowing this gives you the key to
using Ayurveda effectively for yourself.
Determining your prakriti—your fundamental dosha
balance—requires an assessment of your most natural state.
Consider your physical structure as well as mental and
emotional tendencies. Remember to think of what is most
natural to you, rather than what you’re like when you are
stressed or ill.
Vata Characteristics
A vata predominant person usually displays the
following traits.
•	 Physique: A light, trim build, often delicate in nature.
The features (facial features, limbs, fingers, etc.) are
long, slim, or narrow, and the hair is thin, wiry, or curly.
•	 Digestion: The appetite and digestion are often
variable, going up and down, yet often lean
towards “eating like a bird” and constipation.
•	 Personality: A vata person tends to be creative,
be able to “go with the flow” and think abstractly,
and often has rapid speech with a thin, raspy,
high-pitched, or crackly voice. Vata predominant
people are also prone to fear and anxiety, and
have trouble focusing on one thing at a time.

Pitta Characteristics
A pitta predominant person displays the following traits.
•	 Physique: A medium build, with average height and
weight. The physical features can be sharp and fiery
(red hair, for example), precise and well-defined.
•	 Digestion: A pitta predominant person
usually has a ferocious appetite, strong
metabolism, and may “roar” when hungry.
•	 Personality: A pitta nature makes one passionate,
an initiator, directed, and focused. A sharp,
probing intellect and the ability to focus intently
can lead such people to doggedly investigate
and get to the core of a matter. This same fire
can also make a pitta primary person easily
irritable, fussy, angry, judgmental, and critical.
Kapha Characteristics
A kapha predominant person usually displays the
following traits.
•	 Physique: A large, stout frame is a general
kapha characeristic. The features are rounder,
larger, thicker, and often smoother than
those with vata or pitta predominance.
•	 Digestion: The appetite is consistent and
regulated. The metabolism tends to be slow,
Chapter 2: Prakriti—Your Constitution



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

7
and kapha dominant people may accumulate
weight more readily and have more difficulty
losing it. As the digestion can be sluggish, the
person may feel sleepy or tired after eating.
•	 Personality: A kapha person may be described
as “down to earth” or “solid as a rock” (notice
the reference to earthy qualities); there is a
tendency toward being grounded, stable, patient,
compassionate, and nurturing. Once a kapha grabs
ahold of something, he or she holds on tight—this
frequently means a person with a good memory
and/or firm beliefs. These same qualities also make
kapha folk prone to inflexibility, possessiveness,
hesitancy toward change, jealousy, and inertia.
What is Your Constitution?
What are your qualities, tendencies, and proclivities—
physically, mentally, and emotionally? Do you have a
predominance of one of these doshas? Or do you find that
the qualities of one come forth strongly while you also
display a number of characteristics related to another
dosha? What is your Ayurvedic blueprint?
You can take a quiz to help determine your prakriti, and
see more examples of features associated with vata, pitta,
and kapha, on the Banyan Botanicals website.
After taking this quiz, you may also choose to receive
general daily guidelines to help maintain your ideal dosha
balance.
Chapter 2: Prakriti—Your Constitution (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

8
Why Knowing Your Vikriti is Essential to
Optimum Health
In Ayurveda, all ill health is viewed, fundamentally, as
a dosha imbalance (called vikriti). Dosha imbalances
can manifest in various stages, from a general feeling of
“something is not right” all the way to diagnosed illnesses
with serious complications. To address this, Ayurveda
presents a vast toolbox of treatment modalities to choose
from; but whatever the treatment, the goal is to reestablish
the person’s natural balance of vata, pitta, and kapha.
To achieve this balance, Ayurveda focuses on two

## key principles:


## 1.

Remove the inciting cause.

## 2.

Treat the lingering imbalance with the opposite.
An Ayurvedic practitioner works with these two principles,
providing an in-depth analysis and skillfully drawing from
the toolbox to create a customized wellness plan. While
it is best to work with a practitioner, you can begin your
Ayurvedic journey even before a consultation, and the self-
awareness that you gain through careful observation will
serve you for your lifetime.
You can start by taking the Banyan Botanicals vikriti quiz
to determine your imbalances.
The more you observe the subtle qualities in your body, the
more flexibility you’ll have in your day-to-day choices. Every
living being is dynamic. We continually change and renew
every day. In fact, this is the very thing that empowers us to
achieve better health! It is the body’s capacity to regenerate
itself by creating new cells that allows healing to happen. So
if you can feel what is going on with your body today, you
can make diet, lifestyle, and supplement choices to
encourage your own optimal balance. Today, are you
internally hot or cold? Heavy and dull, or light and airy?
Dry and rough, or well lubricated?
Once you get an internal gauge, then just remember one
thing: balance any dosha imbalances with the opposite
qualities. While this may seem like a foreign or daunting
task, it becomes easier as you learn and remember the
qualities of each dosha and apply its opposite. For example,
when vata is aggravated or imbalanced, it may manifiest
as excess coldness, dryness, or roughness. This can mean
mild constipation (cold, dry, rough stool) or difficulty with
joints (dry, rough cartilage in the joint spaces and reduced
synovial fluid). In this situation, Ayurveda recommends
applying the opposite qualities of warmth, oilyness
lubrication, and smoothness to regain balance.
See Table 2 for examples of how to apply these qualities,
using vata as an example.
Table 2
Balancing Vata: Warm, Oily / Lubricating,
and Smooth Treatments
Diet
Warm, cooked foods with small
amounts of ghee (clarified but-
ter). Avoid dry, raw, cold, and/or
rough foods.
Massage
Therapy
Topical application of sesame oil
or herbal massage oil (oil infused
with vata-pacifying herbs, such as
Banyan Botanicals Vata Massage
Oil or Mahanarayan Oil).
Yoga
Vata-pacifying poses that are
grounding and restorative.
Emphasize slow, smooth, and
steady during your practice.
Herbs
Consider warming, nourishing,
strengthening, and cleansing

## herbs. For example:

ashwagandha; shatavari;
dashamula; ginger; and triphala
(amalaki, haritaki, and bibhitaki).
Chapter 3: Vikriti—Your Imbalances



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

9
Given that we don’t live in a protective bubble, we must face
numerous challenges to our health on a daily basis. Some
stem from choices that we make—our diet, lifestyle, lack of
exercise, unprocessed emotions, and undue stress. Others
from exposures that are out of our control—water and air
pollution, harmful chemicals in our food supply, excessive
noise in our communities, etc. As we interact with our
world, both the world external to us and the world within
our minds, the doshas tend to get jostled out of balance.
“Like Increases Like” is an invaluable Ayurvedic principle
to keep in mind, here. If you are experiencing an excess of
a particular quality and associated discomfort, exposure
to more of that quality will only aggravate the problem.
For instance, if you are a kapha predominant person with
a heavy, solid constitution, then eating heavy, fatty foods,
which are kapha in nature, will surely aggravate a weight
problem. Similarly, for a pitta predominant person, an
excess of spicy foods, which are naturally heating and
inflaming, can aggravate acid indigestion, which is also
hot, burning, and fiery by nature. While frequent travel
on airplanes, which involves vata (light, airy, drying, cold,
rough), can worsen vata imbalances, such as constipation
and sleeping difficulties (good sleep is grounded and
heavy, the opposite of vata). Air travel can also challenge
the nervous system, which functions on the principle of
movement (as nerve impulses) and so is vata in nature;
perhaps you’ve noticed certain associated symptoms after
a long flight, such as discomfort from pinched nerves,
sciatica, and so on. Understanding this principle of like
increasing like gives us a powerful tool for wellness.
Digestive fire, agni, is also important to address for optimal
balance. Our body uses agni to process anything that
comes into it. When the agni (digestive fire) is strong, it
is able to take whatever comes in, extract the nourishing
portion, and eliminate the rest as waste. But if our agni is
weak, or the insults on our body are just overwhelming,
we aren’t able to process everything that enters, and this
leads to a build-up of toxins, which Ayurveda calls ama.
This build-up of ama can inhibit the proper functioning
of any bodily system and lead to dosha imbalance.
Of note, digestion refers to more than our body’s
processing of the food and drink we ingest. The mouth is
only one entry point into the body. We must also digest
the experiences that come in through our eyes, ears, nose,
and skin. Included with these experiences are the emotions
they create, which the agni must digest as well. As most
of us have experienced, all emotions have a lingering
presence, whether anger, fear, joy, or grief. Hearing cruel,
angry words said in the “heat of an argument” can produce,
for example, acid indigestion that is similar to that which
occurs after eating an excessively spicy meal. Undigested
experiences and emotions can lead to ama and physical
symptoms just as readily as can an undigested meal.
Finally, we must look at the choices we make. Ayurveda
considers the source of many imbalances to be our own
“crimes against wisdom”.1 Our innate wisdom of what
is appropriate for us and what is not tells us what choices
to make; but we often choose to override this inner voice
in preference of a strong desire or craving. These choices
can pile up, especially when there is already a weak agni
or backed up ama. While there is nothing wrong with
having fun or indulging in life’s pleasures, one must know
one’s limitations. Our own choices are often at the
core of dosha imbalance.
1 As translated by Dr. Vasant Lad
Chapter 4: How Lifestyle Influences Dosha Balance



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

10
Once you know your prakriti (unique dosha balance),
you can act to promote your well-being. The key is
to keep your vata, pitta, and kapha balanced. This is
something that you can attend to regularly—daily, in fact.
The ideal time to start paying attention to the doshas is
before they become imbalanced—this is the Ayurvedic
method of true preventative health. In this context, your
daily routine is your most powerful ally. The body, being
subject to the laws of nature, ages. But aging does not
need to mean being burdened with ill health. What
can you do to age gracefully, starting at any age?
Start with the Following Six Strategies to Keep

## Your Doshas Balanced:


## 1. Keep Your Digestive Fire Strong

Agni, or digestive fire, is responsible for nourishing
the tissues and removing wastes, and so it must
be protected and promoted. How do you know
if your agni is strong? Your appetite, digestion,
and ama (toxin) buildup are good indicators.
Appetite
A different kind of appetite is associated with each dosha.
Vata dosha, whose agni is often flickering and on the cusp
of being snuffed out, may have a variable appetite, being
hungry at times, and having no appetite at others. Pitta,
on the other hand, has a fiery hunger that arises quickly
and with intensity, and demands to be satisfied. Kapha’s
appetite is sure and steady, following a faithful pattern.
The common thread that reveals healthy agni
is hunger. If you aren’t getting hungry, and find
yourself just eating because it’s time to eat, then your
agni is struggling, likely either from the delicacy
of vata or the heavy dullness of excess kapha.
Digestion
Food is supposed to nourish our tissues and give us
energy. Ask yourself how you feel after a meal. If the
agni is strong and the doshas are balanced, you will
feel energized and satisfied after a meal. If imbalanced
vata is affecting your agni, you may have bloating,
burping, and flatulence as your embarrassing post-meal
acquaintances. If pitta is excessively stoking your agni,
acid indigestion and burning may torment your peace.
And if imbalanced kapha has gotten a hold of your agni,
you may be too sleepy after a meal to know what hit
you, or you may notice a phlegm or mucus buildup.
Ama (Toxin) Buildup
When the agni is not healthy, the things that enter the body
are not properly processed and ama builds up, creating
an obstruction to natural flow. If you look anywhere in the
natural world, stagnation leads to poor health. Consider
a body of water. What happens when the water can’t
move? Algae and other growth builds up, eventually
choking out the water’s entire living ecosystem. Similarly,
says Ayurveda, life energy must be able to flow freely
through the body’s tissues for a healthy state to exist.
A number of signs can clue you into ama buildup. The first
is a heavy white coating on your tongue. Make a habit of
checking your tongue every morning, and you’ll see that
the coating changes, especially as you make changes in
your diet and lifestyle. The second sign of ama is odor—
body odor, mouth odor, odor with flatulence, etc. And a
third sign of ama is a generalized sense of heaviness and
dullness—this can be both in the body and the mind.
If ama is creating havoc in your internal ecosystem,
you can take charge by supporting a healthy agni.
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

11
Tips for a Healthy Agni
Improving or kindling your agni can be

## likened to stoking a small bonfire:

•	 Avoid ice and cold drinks. Instead, drink
warm water or hot herbal teas. When eating a
meal, take only sips so as to avoid dousing your
digestive fire with a large amount of liquid.
•	 Cook with warming spices. Cinnamon, clove,
black pepper, and ginger are great examples.
For a spicy, agni-inducing appetizer, you can
cut ginger into small pieces, add a squeeze
of lime and a pinch of salt, and enjoy.
•	 Prefer warm, cooked foods over raw, dry, rough
foods. If your food has been cooked by an external
fire, your internal fire won’t have to work as hard.
•	 Take your largest meal at lunchtime. Your
body works in sync with natural rhythms, and
therefore, your internal fire is at its peak when
the sun (the solar system’s fire) is at its peak.
Eat lighter meals in the evening, preferably
allowing at least 2-3 hours before bed.
•	 Give focus to your meal. Multitasking while eating,
though it may seem efficient, distracts your agni, as
it must digest what is coming in through all of the
senses. Instead, even if you can only spare a short
break, focus on your food, chew it thoroughly, and
infuse it with the intention to nourish your body.
•	 Be more active—a brisk walk, a vigorous swim
in warm water, an enlightening yoga class.
All of these will serve to kindle the agni.
•	 Ayurvedic herbs and spices to support healthy
digestion can be added to your food or, if your
lifestyle demands it, taken as a supplement.
•	 Vata digestion: Prefer warming, grounding,
digestive herbs, such as ginger, black
pepper, cumin, and asafoetida (also called
hing). Vata Digest tablets can also be
taken to support healthy digestion.
•	 Pitta digestion: Pick soothing, cooling herbs
and supplements, such as aloe vera, cumin,
and fennel. Pitta Digest contains cooling
herbs to help strengthen digestion.
•	 Kapha digestion: Choose heating, activating
herbs such as black pepper, ginger, and pippali,
which can also be found in Kapha Digest.

## 2. Be Attentive to Your Diet

“Diet” is such a torturous word for most people. It brings
to mind thoughts of depriving oneself of enjoyment
and slaving over a stove juggling a thousand nutritional
principles regarding what you “should be eating.”
With Ayurveda food is to be celebrated. It is the very
substance of life. Once digested, it is the essence of our
food that nourishes our every cell and allows for the
production of new cells. In this way, food is medicine,
and can be used to prevent or right dosha imbalance.
Many people relate eating to a list of rules, of do’s and
don’ts; but you can also approach eating from an intuitive
place, where you consider the state of your being and what
needs balancing, then choose foods with the opposite
qualities to help create the balance. On a cold winter
day, for example, when your body has to brave freezing
temperatures and gusty winds, treat yourself to warm,
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

12
grounding foods. Heavy, grounding foods don’t have to
be fattening—you can enjoy a hearty soup, warm rice,
or a small baked fruit dessert redolent with the aroma
of cinnamon. On such a day, a raw salad would be best
avoided due to its cold, dry, rough, and light qualities.
Conversely, if you are feeling a lot of internal heat and
excess pitta, which may be manifesting as an angry skin
rash or hot flashes or a flared temper, soothe yourself
with light, sweet, bitter, and cooling foods. Enjoy fresh
greens and sweet fruits. Fresh milk—or coconut milk—
based foods are also nicely cooling and soothing.
Just stay away from fiery, spicy dishes, predominantly
sour/acidic foods, or excessively salty foods.
As a general guideline, fresh and home cooked is
best. Even with a busy schedule, you can find time
to nourish yourself in this way. Do a little extra prep
when you have the time (chop extra vegetables,
for example), and find recipes that come together
quickly. Turn on a crock-pot in the morning and
come home to a scrumptious home-cooked meal.
Most importantly, remember to give your food
some love. The Ayurvedic point of view is that on a
subtle level, the intention and emotion that go into
making your food impact its ability to nourish your
body. Developing a joyous relationship with your
food is one of the most healthy things you can do, as
opposed to falling into guilt, haste, or indifference.
Eventually, thinking of your food in this way becomes
second nature and you can choose your foods wisely
without worrying about too many rules. If you take just
a few minutes to observe how you feel after every meal,
you naturally start recognizing the effects of various food
choices on your body. There are also numerous guides and
books available that provide Ayurvedic recipes and list
foods that are good for vata, pitta, and kapha. These are
useful and fun, but remember that they are only guidelines,
so don’t let them constrict you. We are always changing,
and a healthy diet requires variety; nature provides her
bounty of nutrients in a diversity of colors and textures.

## 3. Create a Daily Routine

To really reap the benefits of Ayurveda, and prevent
the doshas from wreaking havoc, let the principles of
Ayurveda become part of your daily lifestyle. Rather
than a constrictive set of rules to follow, Ayurveda
offers a creative and expansive way of living.
Consider creating simple, enjoyable daily routines for
yourself. In a world where you constantly give of yourself
to those around you, you must find time and space to
give to yourself, to rejuvenate yourself. A daily routine
allows you to do just this—keep yourself tuned-up to
boldly face the opportunities and challenges of life.
Ayurveda offers practices that address each of the sense
organs, to help them function optimally. There are also
practices for the nervous system and the mind, so that we
may best interact and integrate with our world. Following
are a few of these practices that we find particularly helpful.
Tips for a Healthy Daily Routine
•	 Self-massage with warm oil: A daily self-massage
done with warm oil has numerous benefits, from
rejuvenating the skin to toning strong muscles,
lubricating and supporting healthy joints, fortifying
the nervous system, stimulating general circulation,
and benefiting healthy sleep patterns. In general, self-
massage is a great aid in pacifying excess vata. The
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

13
Sanskrit word for oil, sneha, is also the Sanskrit word
for love; as such, this practice offers a subtle way to
learn to love and accept yourself, just as you are.

Self-massage can be done in as little as 15 minutes
a day. For more detailed information on this
restorative practice, please visit the Ayurvedic Oil
Massage page on the Banyan Botanicals website.
•	 Healthy bowel habits: Ayurveda has long recognized
the need for an optimal colon. As the body’s main
means of removing waste, healthy daily bowel
movements are essential to preventing the build up
of toxic waste substances and to keeping the doshas
balanced. Modern medical systems echo the extreme
importance of colon health, implicating poor colon
function in everything from allergies to cancer.

A supportive daily routine promoted in Ayurveda is to
sit on the commode at the same time every morning
for a few minutes, allowing your body to form the
habit of regular bowel evacuation. In order to support
soft, well-formed stools, Ayurveda also advocates
consuming appropriate amounts of water, ghee
(clarified butter) and oil, and vegetables and grains
with high fiber content. Drinking a glass of warm
water first thing in the morning on an empty stomach
and gently massaging your abdomen in a clock-wise
motion can also help stimulate a bowel movement.

When needed, occasional supplemention with
natural herbal remedies, such as fiber supplements
or triphala, can help restore the colon’s natural
intelligence. Herbs such as triphala serve
numerous functions in supporting optimal health,
with bowel health being just one aspect.
•	 Exercise for body, mind, and spirit: As with any
comprehensive health system, Ayurveda promotes
physical activity and exercise. For complete health,
Ayurveda proposes that not only the body, but also the
mind and spirit, need activity to stay balanced, limber,
and strong.

Today, as in ancient times, these things may be
accomplished through yoga. Yoga is not just
about twisted body positions, but is instead a
philosophy rooted in using the discipline of body
and mind to reach one’s highest potential, and
to learn how to accept “what is.” Starting from
wherever you are right now, gradually practicing
physical flexibility and strength in association with
a calm, full breath translates into the flexibility
and strength of a calm, aware mind. Can you really
get all this from yoga postures? Absolutely—when
you study regularly with a teacher who carries
this wisdom and is able to coordinate physical
movement with proper breathing practices, skillfully
fostering the body/mind/spirit connection.
•	 General hygiene: To round out these suggestions,
Ayurveda also gives some general recommendations

## for a supportive daily morning routine, including:

•	 Brush teeth and scrape tongue.
•	 Rinse mouth with a small amount
of Daily Swish Pulling Oil.
•	 Apply oil to head, nose, and ears
(covered if you do a self-massage).
•	 Wash eyes with cool water.
•	 Cleanse all external orifices daily.
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

14

## 4. Choose Supplements When Needed

To keep the doshas balanced, nature has provided
supportive herbs whose benefits have been relied upon for
thousands of years. These benefits have been enumerated
in Ayurveda based on the qualities and doshas that
each herb addresses, supporting every bodily system
and function. Sometimes, the body’s natural intelligence
and inner workings need a kick-start, or a gentle nudge
in the right direction. Herbs can provide just this.
With the benefit of the Internet, you can learn more
about which Ayurvedic herbs are traditionally
recommended to support which bodily systems and
functions. To create a complete plan of action, including
herbal supplements, that is just right for you, we
recommended that you visit an Ayurvedic practitioner.
As a safety note, to prevent exposure to pesticides
and harmful chemicals, we recommend you choose
herbs that are certified organic when possible, and
are tested for heavy metals and microbes. Know
about the quality control standards of the company
from whom you purchase your supplements.
You can find a complete selection of Ayurvedic products
made from herbs that are certified organic, sustainably
sourced, and fairly traded at www.banyanbotanicals.com.

## 5. Find Harmony with Natural Rhythms

(Climate and Season)
The body’s rhythms are inseparably related to the
rhythms of nature. Your body is a dynamic, living
being, ever changing in relation to your actions,
and also in relation to age, time of day, season,
and geography. Each of these cycles of nature is
associated with certain qualities and doshas.
Age
•	 Childhood: Kapha age (Time for growing and
building our structure and foundation)
•	 Adulthood: Pitta age (Time to be driven
to fulfill our purpose in this world)
•	 Elder years: Vata age (Time to be reflective and
contemplative, when the physical is starting to wear
down)

This natural age cycle is one that is difficult for
many people to accept, especially in our society,
which proposes that we must run like we are
25 until the day we die. Instead, the time-tested
wisdom of Ayurveda proposes that we learn to
find the purpose of each stage of life, and live
fully according to that appropriate purpose.
Time of Day
•	 Vata: 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. AND 2 p.m. to 6 p.m.
•	 Kapha: 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. AND 6 p.m. to 10 p.m.
•	 Pitta: 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. AND 10 p.m. to 2 a.m.
Season (these qualities vary depending on where one lives)
•	 Spring (warm, lush, green, rainy): Kapha
•	 Spring (warm, dry, windy): Vata
•	 Summer (hot, dry): Vata, pitta
•	 Early autumn (hot, rainy): Pitta
•	 Late autumn (cool, windy): Vata
•	 Winter (cold, dry, windy): Vata; heavy dampness can
add kapha
Geography
•	 Climate varies depending on where you
live, and this accounts for the different
qualities associated with the seasons.
•	 Generally, a specific area will contribute
to a certain dosha imbalance regardless of
season. For example, living in a desert region
brings arid dryness (and imbalances vata to
some degree), regardless of the season.
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

15
While this can all become overwhelming, the key is to
keep in mind that these factors definitely affect you. If
you are noticing a dosha imbalance in yourself, consider
your age, the time of day, the season, and the place where
you live—could these factors be adding to the imbalance?
If so, determine what is in your control to adjust, and
how you can use opposite qualities to balance yourself.
Panchakarma
Of note, Ayurveda recommends a cleanse when
transitioning from season to season to help rebalance
any doshas that have gone awry in the preceding season.
A traditional method of cleansing called panchakarma
is performed under the care of a practitioner; it employs
various methods based on individual needs and specific
dosha imbalance. The key principles involved in
panchakarma include slowing one’s consumption (of
food, experiences, etc), using oil massage and steam to
prepare the body for cleansing, and then introducing
one or more major methods of cleansing along with
supplementation to wash away unnecessary buildup.

## 6. Find Harmony within Yourself

Finally, you must use each day to find harmony
within yourself. As has already been mentioned,
health incorporates an integral union of body, mind,
and spirit. Finding your purpose or calling is never
insignificant. This may come in the form of everyday
tasks—taking care of the family, earning a living,
supporting a friend, cleaning a floor, making laws, or
giving back to the community—all of these play a role in
the dance of the universe. Using your body, mind, and
spirit in accord with your unique purpose is the most
fundamental way of keeping you happy and healthy.
Ayurveda and Banyan Botanicals: From the
Ancient to the Modern
Banyan Botanicals is proud to bring you this introduction
to the transformational concepts of Ayurveda. Passed
down through the generations from masters to students
both orally and in ancient scriptures, Ayurveda has
thrived over time. Ayurveda is based on a deep knowing
that we are complex beings with many levels—from
gross body, to subtle mind, to essential spirit—and
that both ill health and the healing process effects all
of these levels. Achieving balance and well-being at
all of these levels is the sign of true health. Ayurveda
examines life as it can and should exist in accord with
nature, and teaches us to live in harmony with our inner
and outer realities—from the individual to familial,
social and universal health. The tools and treatments of
Ayurveda serve to awaken your own healing capacity.
There is no single, standard treatment or protocol
in Ayurveda. Instead, Ayurveda’s favorite answer to
the question of treatment is, “it depends”. Ayurvedic
practices employed by an individual for healing depends
on the individual’s natural constitution, the season,
age, climate, and so on. As such, two individuals may
treat the same imbalance differently. Recognizing
that every individual as a unique blueprint for health,
Ayurveda allows for unique paths to healing.
Bringing this philosophy to bear on modern times,
Ayurveda recognizes the stressors and demands of
current times, and concurrently holds to truths that are
applicable in every age and time. Banyan Botanicals,
inspired by a deep passion for the living wealth offered
by Ayurveda, also recognizes the state of current times,
and is honored to bring you this e-book, hopefully giving
you a new perspective on your health and well-being.
Banyan Botanicals is your source for premium quality
Ayurvedic products made from certified organic herbs
that are sustainably sourced and fairly traded. We take
pride in bringing you only the best to support your
journey to wellness.
**Please note that this E-book is for general educational
purposes, and is not meant to diagnose or treat any
diseases. Please see your physician for accurate diagnosis
and to develop and appropriate treatment plan. No advice
in this book should replace your current treatment or
the advice of your physician, and no treatment should
be undertaken without first consulting your physician.
Chapter 5: The Secret to Great Health—Doshas to
Maintain Balance (cont’d)



## 800.953.6424   |   BANYANBOTANICALS.COM

16

## 1.

Agni: The digestive fire

## 2.

Ama: Toxic build-up of waste and harmful residue

## 3.

Ayurveda: The 5000 year old traditional healing system of India, which
translates to mean the “wisdom or knowledge of life”

## 4.

Dosha(s): The three principles (vata, pitta, and kapha) which are used to describe
a person’s balanced constitution as well as current imbalances.

## 5.

Ghee: Clarified butter, made by slowly cooking butter to remove the water and milk solids

## 6.

Kapha: One of the 3 doshas, or constitutional principles, used to describe one’s state of balance and imbalance. Kapha is
made of earth and water, displays the qualities of these elements, and is responsible for stability and structure in the body.

## 7.

Panchakarma: Traditional cleansing process used in Ayurveda

## 8.

Pitta: One of the 3 doshas, or constitutional principles, used to describe one’s state of balance and imbalance. Pitta is
made of fire and water, displays the qualities of these elements, and is responsible for transformation in the body.

## 9.

Prakriti: One’s inherent balanced constitution
10.	 Sneha: The quality of being oily, which helps alleviate dryness. Also means love.
11.	 Vata: One of the 3 doshas, or constitutional principles, used to describe one’s state of balance and imbalance. Vata
is made of air and space, displays the qualities of these elements, and is responsible for movement in the body.

## 12.	 Vikriti: One’s current imbalanced state

Glossary
